hi everybody this is Dr Carl gold camp
and welcome back to another episode of
the keto naturopath I'd like to make a
special introduction for this particular
interview which is Dr Thomas Seyfried at
Boston College I've had a number of
prequels to this particular interview to
help sort of parse out some of the
information he is such a passionate
presenter the information he presents at
any presentation you may see him at
is very information intense and thick
sentence by sentence
so that's how he lives his life is
intense and he's done a lot of work to
get where he is
instead of going over credential after
credential and some of that you already
know because you've listened to his past
podcasts and he's certainly searchable
on the internet
I would like to give you a visual
analogy of what I believe he is in
today's world of research
for cancer in particular
he has certainly broken from the past
and he has really worked on elaborating
cancer as a metabolic disease and you
know that we've talked about that so let
me give you this image
let's go back in time about 200 years
plus
back to maybe a small town in New
England in the fall
I grew up in New Hampshire so it's easy
for me to picture
let's pretend it's at the peak of
foliage
and you go into your small town
and at this time of year they have a
what they call woodsman's weekend
that's a lot of athletic events in that
context
from
TV turning logs to Ox pulling
contests to
cutting trees and who cut the buck saw
and so on and so forth but one contest
in particular is very skill oriented and
that is a person man or woman usually
men
would stand 10 to 20 to 25 yards away
from
a rail that's placed vertically on a
stand
and support it
and this individual would take his
Hatchet
and throw it
with the idea of one hitting the rail
just like a archery contest whoever gets
closer to the bullseye wins
well this particular contest
if you are so good at what you do
throwing the force the trajectory you
know calculating how far it has to go if
you're
precisely perfect with what you need to
do
that hatchet will strike the Braille at
a precise point and shatter that rail
from top to bottom
and so if you can imagine in this
particular Village somebody showing up
after long lines of people taking their
whack at it
and to see this happen which seldom
happens nearly never happens people will
hit it certainly but never shatter the
rail
the Dr Tom Siegfried is that person in
the context of cancer research today he
has shattered what current cancer
therapy has assumed to be true that it
was a genetic oriented disease what they
call the somatic mutation Theory he's
taken his hatchet from 25 yards away and
precisely Landed It
with documented research after research
after research and finally his word and
his work is spreading around the world
and being implemented slowly
it is
absolutely the edge of a paradigm shift
no further Ado I hope you enjoy part one
of this interview with Dr Thomas secret
hi this is Dr Carl goldkamp a few things
I have to say what is we personally are
involved both as a lifestyle the
ketogenic diet but also through my 16
years of clinical practice of what is
effective what do people need to take
sometimes all the time to support their
ketogenic diet you'll get bits and
pieces of this ongoing week after week
it's important to be comprehensive in
one way it's simple and one way it's a
little bit complicated
foreign
hey Tom how are you Carl nice to see you
today can you see me okay I can see your
head over your desk there you go a lot
better
Tom thanks a lot boy I have to say I
just listened to uh the interview you
did with uh Peter attia oh yeah yeah and
I think that came off pretty well I mean
it's a small seminar in itself yeah well
he was here in my office and uh he sent
he spent quite a while and I said to him
he could ask me whatever he wants to ask
and he was as you heard I think he asked
me quite a bit of questions and then his
colleague Bob Kaplan was here in the
office to collect the references and in
support of what what I was saying right
you know in part I feel like I'm asking
you to repeat so much of your
information but it's so fascinating and
every time I thought I had a handle on
what you were talking about I realized
it was a deeper level and
um I'm going to jump ahead but we'll go
back to the beginning as like the whole
uh substrate level Foster
phosphorylation is it was something I
was unaware of I thought I knew Warburg
and everything else but let's get into
that later because that's a big key to
okay of all this but some of the
personal questions I have is like you
are a Vietnam vet
that's right and then how did you go
from there
to gosh I think I'm interested in
Biochemistry yeah well I had done
biology before I went into the army and
you know I was very interested in
genetics but at that time in 1968
everybody had was being drafted so it
wasn't
um the plan no one could really make
plans uh to do anything right you know
so I just decided to join the officer
Corps in the field artillery at Fort
Sill Oklahoma
and then I spent about a year in Germany
and then a year in Vietnam with the
first Cavalry division
so I spent almost my whole time in the
jungle
um and maybe 60 60 of the time in the
jungle and and 40 of the time on the on
the Firebase so it was kind of split
between jungle and Firebase you know
either neither one was uh what we would
call a comfortable existence
so it was your perspective like I don't
know if life's Gonna Last another 10
minutes but I might as well apply to uh
you know graduate work and see what I'm
yeah so I had already thought about
applying before I had gone into the
military and and and then as I said in
Travis's book I I actually applied to
graduate school while while in the
jungle in the and and the paper was full
of mud and stuff and I I just never
thought anybody would accept an
application like that
but but they did I went to Illinois
State University got a degree in
genetics master's degree
and then I went to the University of
Illinois I got a got a PhD in genetics
and biochemistry at Urbana that's right
at Urbana yeah Champaign Urbana and then
and then I did a lot of work on lipid
biochemistry and uh mammalian Mouse
genetics and I just followed that uh
with a postdoc at Yale and then I got on
the faculty in the neurology department
at Yale it was a clinical Department of
Neurology right right so um you know it
was mostly epilepsy work I wasn't doing
any at the fir at first I wasn't doing
any cancer research there at all but
then we started to look at gangliocides
and tumors and
um uh I started to get interested in in
tumors in the mouse
and then we started to um you know it
was always a back uh a a a a side
project I had a couple of NIH grants
over the years to support the work but
most of the work I was doing was in
epilepsy right
um but the cancer stuff
um was on angiogenesis which is blood
vessels in the cancer cells you know
and people thought that was hot you know
gangliocides control angiogenesis and
you know his academic stuff
I couldn't I couldn't see off the bat
how any of it would be applied to any
person in the clinic and I I would say
90 of all cancer research is done with
no no intra not an interest with no
connection to what goes on in the clinic
you say that because somebody just needs
to come up with another idea get it
funded and move on but not have a yeah
your job in cancer research is to is to
sustain your research program
it's nothing to do with keeping people
alive in a Cancer Clinic
I mean that's that's a fact yeah
um so uh I mean they they go under the
umbrellas cancer research because you're
studying some some growing some tumor
cells and culture on the ass of a mouse
but but you know it's it's just um it's
not like oh this therapy is definitely
gonna is gonna have an impact and but
you know it's funny because everybody's
paper everybody I would say you know 80
of the papers that are written in cancer
research this finding could have some
significance in the clinic right and
that's the end of it it is this this
could have some value in the clay this
might do this this might do that but
nobody's doing anything right okay so we
have 1600 people a day dying for things
that might help them I agree I agree
well now I understand why they say that
let me go back because
um that couple things it's really
interesting you were working on epilepsy
which you would have thought would have
been automatic to the ketogenic diet but
you took kind of a different route and
you came back to impart the ketogenic
diet as part of being the metabolic
therapy would that be correct yeah well
we started with calorie restriction and
um because it's well known documented in
the literature that just cutting
calories can significantly reduce tumors
and we found that this we and others had
shown that this is linked to
angiogenesis so if you want to stop
angiogenesis
reduce calories and then we found in
others found that you know one of the
mechanisms for calorie restriction is
reduced inflammation so everybody knows
that cancer cells and tissues are
inflamed with the growing tumor wow so
calorie restriction reduces inflammation
but we had to show that it works through
the NF Kappa B signaling system so each
of these observations had to be linked
to a series of signaling Cascades you
know uh akt signaling for vegf and you
know people the guys in the cancer field
love mtor akt they like all that stuff
so you got to do something that oh you
know that's like oh we got mtor wow this
is the most important thing so um you
know you do this stuff only you need to
get money right if you say you know
you're not going to study akt signaling
it's very hard to get any money here fed
Jeff for you know what's what's the
molecular mechanism we spend so much
time in the field looking for mechanisms
molecular mechanisms for things that may
have no relevance to the clinic yeah
yeah so there's two fields of cancer
research one is just pure basic stuff
and the other is is is clinically
applicable
so
um you know you think that the basic
research should set the platform for why
something should be tried in the clinic
and that I think is the purpose should
be the purpose of cancer research is to
say this work that I'm doing will have a
direct application to what's going on in
the clinic right
and um and and I think that's that's
important so you know we were doing all
this on mice and we also developed some
of the best animal models for the
disease in my laboratory
um over the years you know I I worked
indirectly uh with Harry Zimmerman uh
Harry Zimmerman was the physician who
started the first uh Department of
neuropathology in the United States at
Yale University back in I think it was
the 19 late 20 early 30s and he was
still alive when I got into the field
was he one of your mentors or he just
happened to be there he he he wasn't he
was at um at Mount Sinai in New York
City
uh but I I had a lot of phone
conversations and letters uh that I had
communicated because he was the guy who
started the doing the first brain tumor
work one of the first by putting
chemicals into the mouse's brain and
developing brain tumors and then
classifying uh all these tumors and uh
showing how similar they were
histologically to human tumors but in my
book I think in chapter three I exposed
the fallacy of the the ambiguity of how
anybody looks at brain tumors it's a
it's a real mess
um no everybody has a different opinion
and no it's what it is is group
consensus if you allow neuropathologists
to make a decision on their own it's
often very different from their
colleague that we make an independent
decision on his own so they all come
together as a group and they come so
it's a consensus thing so when you go
around the field all this consensus
and then you give these people
individual tumors by themselves uh to
ask and everybody has a different
opinion about what it is so it became
clear to me that these guys don't don't
know anything about what they're doing
who cares a classification of the truth
does it make any difference what you're
going to do to the patient after you
classify the tumor no you're still going
to cut and radiate the guy so what
difference does it make what kind of 12
it's this and then if you go in and cut
the tumors out too prematurely you cause
a low grade to become a high grade and
they don't like to talk about that but
you know a good 25 to 30 percent of all
glioblastomas started as SEC as low
grade tumors
that's a terrible it's actually a
terrible situation I'm trying to I'm
going to write a paper on trying to
change the standard of care because what
we're doing to these brain cancer
patients is is I agree I agree
absolutely before I get the horse in
front of the cart I wanted to go back
back when you were sitting lipids and
you were um how did you you crossed you
came across the comp a company that
asked you to do some research yeah and
and then you did and you realized it was
kind of it wasn't the the drug at all so
uh but that's a great calorie
restriction that's right so yeah so we
then we wrote a chapter in a book
um an indirect calorie restriction a
couple of people had had mentioned this
actually uh Albert Tannenbaum a long
time ago had mentioned this about drugs
that if you give a drug to a mouse and
it makes them sick my mice don't vomit
you know
um they just stop eating and uh what
happens is if the mouse stops eating oh
the tumors start to shrink so if you
take the drug out and just restrict the
food intake to the same level as the
drug the tumor shrinks to the same level
many times not all the time and that's
exactly what you did in that in that
particular right yeah so it told and
besides the drug targeted ganglersides
it wasn't like the drug wasn't so it was
at the first it looked very interesting
the drug that we use blocked ganglia
side biosynthesis but also Shrunk the
tumor so it was at the so the company
that made the drug was very excited
because they thought that it was the
shrink it was the reduction of the
gangly sides that was responsible for
the shrinkage of the tumor but we then
later on uh found out that the drug uh
the Restriction of the ganglosides had
nothing to do with the shrinkage of the
tumor it it was the food intake so we
did some control experiments and and um
I can't remember the details that I have
to go back and look but but it wasn't
the ganglia sides okay so uh we and that
got the drug company upset because they
thought they had a thing there it turned
out to be again indirect calorie
restriction they want their money back
yeah well that's that's actually what
happened to
um uh what's the woman's name yeah she's
kind of famous
um she worked with a drug company and
they spilled the beans in advance she
pulled uh her stocks out of the drug
company but I look back at that uh that
drug
um Martha was it Martha Stewart yeah
yeah right right so I went back and
looked at that uh that drug that got her
into all this trouble or that company I
guess
and in my mind it was working through
calorie restriction so uh when I get
when they give the drug to the mice they
the tumors shrunk but their body weights
also shrunk comparatively so it was
clearly in my mind that the major effect
of whatever that drug was
um independent of stock Investments
right uh um it was working through
calorie restriction but it had bigger
implications only because of all the
other riffraff that went around
associated with it yeah but I went back
and looked at the drug and I said damn
that drug is only that's the same thing
I was looking at you know something that
was calorie restriction so then you say
to yourself you know how many of these
drugs
uh are in fact working in part uh
through indirect calorie restriction and
how many people who receive these drugs
who stop eating and get vomited and all
this other stuff is working through
indirect calorie restriction so it's
very hard to design an experiment to
control for fatigue diarrhea vomiting
and nausea you know
so um you know but you have to do that
in order to in order to identify what
what the therapeutic benefit is and
generally It's a combination of both the
drug is targeting and killing some of
the tumor cells but also at the same
time causing the host to restrict intake
of calories for a variety of reasons and
together you get some sort of a
therapeutic benefit
so um and that's the whole field has
never been evaluated clearly uh like
that Albert Tannenbaum in my mind and
some of the other early investigators
they were the guys that did a lot of
these kinds of studies and it was very
clear back in the 1940s and 50s you know
that you really have to be careful uh
when you do these kinds of studies so
Tom when you got into you know the
calorie restricted ketogenic diet
there's calorie restricted you know take
out the protein take out the fat so how
did you was it still epilepsy in the
back your mind realizing you know
ketosis is part of this when did you
switch to I mean it's now you know one
of the cornerstones of the overall
metabolic therapy uh that you're working
on but it didn't necessarily you can go
from calorie restriction to calorie
restriction ketogenic diet how did that
well yeah well we felt that to tell
human beings that the best way a good
way to manage your cancer is stop eating
for a month well they're going to look
going to look at you like you're some
nut right right so but that works
actually I've got I've got papers I've
got people calling me from different
countries who actually done that to
people 30 days of just water only it's
unbelievable I would love to read those
that is such a great topic absolutely
yeah yeah just you know it works and
humans just have to do it a longer time
you know 14 21 days
um these kinds and people say oh I'll be
dead I'll be dead no you won't I talked
to George Cahill at this before he died
he was the the head of the Jocelyn
diabetes center here yeah and George and
I would go for hours talking about all
these kinds of things and he would tell
me stuff that you know you could never
do today in today's medicine that he did
the people back in the 40s and 50s but
in the 60s yeah and 60s so uh he he did
a lot of that stuff but but um no human
so it's not practical and when we found
out in the mouse that when we restrict
40 calories because they have a basal
metabolic rate that's six to seven times
higher than ours
um 40 calorie restriction to them is
like a water only therapeutic fast to us
so um and then we did all the
biochemical parameter measurements and
their blood sugars and ketones shifted
in the same ways that a person order
only fasting would do okay as a matter
of fact when humans do water only
fasting you can bring your blood sugars
down lower than the mouse and ketones
much higher than a mouse can get wow so
humans are are supremely designed to go
long periods without eating to starve
yep yeah a mouse will die in five to six
days without any just water with no food
right you know humans are just getting
started at five and six days you know
the body is just starting to ramp up
right so um so we we realized that you
couldn't
be seriously recognized if you're going
to tell people to uh just to stop eating
for for 30 days or something so having
field of epilepsy as long as I did
knowing how we stopped epileptic
seizures with ketogenic diets and we we
published some really beautiful papers
in the field of epilepsy where we were
able to identify glucose as the as the
provocative variable and to this day no
one's really sure how the ketones are
actually blocking the seizures what role
they play but clearly if the glucose is
high you can't stop seizures and then
and then I I had long talks with um the
late John Freeman
uh John was the the person who held on
to the ketogenic diet after Johns
Hopkins yeah
yes yes so John and I would have very
long conversations at the epilepsy
meetings uh discussing all of the
variables and he told me one time that
um in his in his uh um uh practice he
would find every now and then you'd get
a kid that uh liked the ketogenic diet
and they would eat a lot of it and um he
said those kids never we could never
manage seizures in those kids the kids
that would eat a lot of ketogenic diet
because most kids don't like it and they
eat only only as much as they have to
and um and and it was actually and human
beings are a little different than mice
we we we have an anti uh appetite effect
from fat it it it triggers the hormone
cholecystokinin which impacts on the
10th cranial nerve the vagus nerve to
shut down appetite the mice don't have
that uh they do have it but its effect
is not it's not as robust as you see in
humans okay so kids don't usually like
to eat ketogenic diets so they're so we
have to make sure they get enough so
that their their body weights continue
on a trajectory that would be
appropriate
age-appropriate trajectory otherwise you
know we're going to cause them to have a
developmental delay but if kids eat you
know a buttload of ketogenic diet like
whatever this kid was pouring oil on ice
cream and he I mean he was like keto ice
cream with oil on top he put He Loved
oil and he was like oil everywhere and
um he couldn't we couldn't stop John
told me we got a couple of these kids
every now and then and they just get
into this diet and they and we can't
control their seizures so we have to
make sure it's always restricted
so most humans will restrict it but some
so in the mouse we must restrict okay
now some mice it's all dietary dependent
because I have some strains of mice
that if you transition them from a
standard carb diet ciao Mouse Chow diet
to aikido they would starve to death
they would not eat the ketogenic wow so
what we did is we put them on a water
only fast for 18 hours which is like one
week in a human
um almost you know five or six days so
that they're really really hungry and
then we'd give them the diet and they
would eat it uh and they would eat it
but we would still have to restrict it
so that we would have a comparable
reduction in body weight we did a lot of
these kinds of physiological studies and
found out that it's the body weight
that's the most critical variable so
when you compare animals under different
dietary conditions you must make sure
that their body weights are exactly the
same that sounds incredible to do really
hard to do so you had the controls you
had to measure every day and saying well
we got to match them to the yes
absolutely wow absolutely so it's a lot
so labor intensity that's why our
research is not cheap yeah we have to
pay a lot of people to work on these
it's like having a clinic with all your
patients being mice
so um you know your work each Mouse is
in his own cage yeah um we measure his
body weight every other day we measure
how much food he ate uh how much water
he drinks you know his body weight and
then we treat him and we got to make
sure that you know his body weight stays
uh the same so we don't run into
inadvertent calorie restriction and then
if you're doing brain cancer research
which is very fascinating
um they get a a massive binge eating
appetite the when you injure the brain
uh you cause a massive increase in in
basal metabolic rate it's unbelievable
so the mice will eat sometimes 30 to 30
to 40 percent more food than they would
normally eat but for the fact that you
now put a tumor in their brain and we
did we did sham controls where we would
just put the choker into the brain to
damage the neural tissue and then you
know uh sew them up
and then and you watch about three days
after the surgery they would start
eating like crazy it was unbelievable so
apparently they needed the energy to
correct the neural the neural tissue so
um so we had to we had to balance all of
these different factors together when we
were doing these kinds of things so you
have to keep otherwise you cannot
interpret the data it becomes extremely
difficult for data interpretation if
you're looking at molecular mechanisms
of angiogenesis and inflammation and
you're not controlling the physiological
variables then you'll be then you'll be
misinterpreting the data that you
collect right right so it took us you
know it took us 15 years of of of trial
and error kind of experiments to do and
learn about the physiology of the mouse
in relationship to the physiology of the
human to do these comparative so that
when we were going later on going to the
clinic we would be able to make uh
recommendations uh as best we could that
might might be more appropriate for the
human species than for the mouse itself
okay so we did a lot of basic 15 years
ago 20 years of basically I have no
doubt I mean just any of your studies
sort of leave me at all but here's let
me just sort of put it in my words are
were you on the path of realizing that
calorie restriction was the key not so
much the ketogenic diet it was the
dropping the glucose and the fact that
there is ketones that feed normal cells
well that's a good thing but it's really
the lack of the glucose that is the or
the lowering of the glucose is the
bigger deal here is that yeah well well
it's a combination of both when we
worked with that but when we worked with
epilepsy as I said you couldn't manage
the seizures unless the blood sugar was
down got it um and then of course what
did the ketones do well ketones are
known to be neural protective we know a
vast amount of information from hunts
Krebs from the Krebs cycle and his and
his last graduate student Richard Veach
from the NIH I mean these guys had had
looked at the role of ketones and and
and Veet showed that they reduce
reactive oxygen species they increase
the Delta G Prime of ATP hydrolysis so
they do a lot of good things but the
cancer cells from the Warburg Theory
they need fuel they need fermentable
fuels so the ketogenic diet is simply
taking away or reducing a key fuel while
the Ketone elevation is simply allowing
normal cells to function in the absence
of glucose and protecting the normal
cells so the it not that the ketones are
we're not sure if they're responsible
for killing tumor cells by elevating
ketones we're just using the elevated
ketones to allow to allow us to
marginalize the tumor cells which are
dependent on the glucose so it's an
elegant internal system that allows the
body to the normal cells of the body to
function appropriately while the tumor
cells are struggling uh to survive so
the Ketone elevation is designed
primarily
for two reasons number one to protect
normal cells and number two to allow us
to push blood sugars down to levels that
people would say would be
life-threatening
but we know from the work of humans
dengler or somebody where they fasted
for a 30 day I think it was 20 or 30
days 20 days what are only humans
and then gave them large dose of insulin
all right you're normally if you took
that same dose of insulin and gave it to
anybody you'd kill them right so they
got the blood sugars down on some of
those people to 0.5 millimolar or nine
milligram per deciliter now as a
physician oh this guy should be dead he
wasn't dead there wasn't any
hypoglycemic associated with it but his
millimolar Ketone was four to six four
to six millimolars in the blood so the
completely protected his brain from a
level of sugar that was almost
unmeasurable so that told us clearly
that if we want to kill cancer cells
that are dependent on glucose we just
have to transition up to therapeutic
ketosis and then Hammer those glucose
levels down and the other beautiful
which we showed in our Mouse models is
in order to get you know glucose into
cells you have to have receptors you
know there's the glute Transporters
right and there's there's a slug of
these glucose Transporters glucone is
the major one right well cancer cells
are garnished with these glucose
Transporters so they're taking in as
much glucose as they can get but when
you take glucose out of the micro
environment the the normal cells of the
brain and other areas up regulate those
Transporters because they want the
glucose too right so they have a
competitor yeah now you're using your
normal cells as a direct competitor
against the tumor cells so this puts
even more pressure on the tumor cells so
if you can that's so therapeutic ketosis
which essentially involves low blood
sugar and elevated ketones uh puts
tremendous pressure on tumor cells on
tumor cells that require glucose for
survival right so that's why the
ketogenic diet done appropriately is
such a powerful therapy uh for for
targeting all kinds of cancers one of
the interfering problems is the standard
of care it seems like we we always have
to treat somebody with some toxic
chemical because they don't they can't
understand that you might get the same
level of therapy if you didn't use the
toxic chemical
they're a little vested in that yes yes
well I'm saying you know I think in some
cases these toxic chemicals interfere
with the with the elegance and the
beauty of the ketogenic diet just so
that we can you know say that we treated
this patient with with something right
you know why don't they treat them with
their metabolic therapy rather than the
toxic chemicals I'm with you on that for
sure so I want to back to the question
now so now I have the ketones in the
glucose and uh we can go back to Warburg
do you have and I know we have the
glucose Ketone index and better than one
but and that's a one-to-one millimole to
millimole did did you sort of how did
you come up with that number you know
saying well at least we need that
because I wanted it and that one little
paragraph too we had a uh there's a
group of us we went through a group fast
about a month ago and I had everybody
keep a spreadsheet and so we calculated
that and uh for a number of us you know
I was in the threes but then on day
three it snap two one and then I did a
seven day fast below that I was you know
after day three I was under one and my
lowest was 4.5 or something 0.45 but it
was interesting that was the pivot point
so in one way how did you come up with
that and yeah
well can we come up with it from a
person that we work with Trudy Dupont
who unfortunately passed away okay she
had a um uh diffuse infiltrating
brainstem glioma uh she lived seven
years uh with this so we kept her she we
think we kept her alive for a lot much
longer period she took no radiation or
chemo but when we were we we initially
said you should keep your blood sugar at
65 and your ketones at about three to
five or three to four somewhere in that
area millimolar of course
um so she was religious in every day
measuring independently her glucose and
ketones and charting and plotting the
num and giving us the numbers and we
plotted a plotted them out over a period
of two years if you can believe this wow
and the variations were huge
um she got into a fight she had a
handicap parking spot oh she lived in
nice uh France she was an American
lawyer graduated from the University of
Wisconsin tremendous woman run marathons
and did all this very attractive woman
um you know really really athletic and
and then she she was diagnosed with this
kind of tumor but she lived in Nice
France and um she had a handicapped
parking spot she had a little bit of a
cane she walked initially with a little
bit of a limp than a cane anyway she got
into an argument with the neighbor who
took her up spot and I know she went
upstairs and measured her blood sugar
and it was like 150 milligrams per
decaliter and she had been keeping it
really low and um she emailed me and she
said you know every time in the morning
it gets really high and then when I get
into a fight with my neighbor and and
now I know my tumor is going to grow
faster and and I said what's your
ketones and she said no they're still
pretty steady at about four and a half
to five millimolar wow so I said um to
my student Josh meidenbauer because we
were the ones who published the paper
that's right you made the the app in
essence right yeah yeah so I said this I
said to uh um Josh I said you know this
whole thing about the glucose is too
capricious uh it can vary from from so
many different kinds of things in the
environment you know an argument to the
morning the morning effect all these
kinds of things but the ketones seem to
be much more stable so what if we divide
the glucose by the ketones and see
whether or not uh we could uh reduce
some of the variation and some of the
anxiety that these people would have so
we then replotted Trudy's two and a half
year data with using a gki because we
had the data from that one individual
and we re-plotted and everything was so
smooth it was really beautiful it was
just oh man and then I told Trudy I said
plot your gki and um and you won't be so
you don't get so um anxiety attack is
the result of your blood sugar elevating
and therefore when you do the ratio it
doesn't look so bad yeah and she did
that and and we said wow this is so then
we went back through all of our
literature on the mouse uh for all the
keto calorie restriction restricted
diets and all those things that we did
and we recalculated the gki and showed
that it was linked to the size of the
tumors wow so you could that you could
then you could then predict uh that the
level that the gki which now becomes a
more meaningful physiological parameter
yes is directly linked to how fast the
tumors grow
so so for people
um to getting into therapeutic ketosis
uh using the gki as a quantitative
measure that allows people to know that
if they're in the zone like you were in
1.0 or below those tumors are going to
be suffering great so so you have a
biomarker a readily easily measurable
biomarker to tell a person whether or
not they're in therapeutic ketosis right
and it's better to do it with blood than
it was on urine strips now we do urine
strips because the ketone strips are a
little bit more expensive yeah but now
they came out with the keto Mojo which
is a glucose Ketone monitor like the
Precision extra but the strips are much
cheaper they're about a dollar five
rather than 260. absolutely you know so
people can use and use that as well we
use you know chemical analysis and we do
all these other things but we did that
for years but we're using strips now too
but um but the whole the whole process
now is that you have you have a
biomarker the problem with the cancer
patients and this is I get so many
emails from all these cancer patients oh
I've done everything I I can't get into
into therapeutic ketosis my my gki is
still around five to eight or whatever
and I said well I'm on this kind of drug
and that kind of drug and I said well
you know when we did all this stuff with
with Trudy and the mice when these
people the mice or the they were on any
drugs
and we're not having no drugs I says
what are you doing well we're taking
dexamethasone for you know you got to
get off all that stuff all right you got
to get what are you taking poisonous
chemicals that are going to give you
anxiety uh and and increase systemic
inflammation I mean you're you're
actually interfering with with the with
the beauty of metabolic therapy so so
um I think that you know once and people
with cancer
have anxiety just because they have a
diagnosis of a disease that's
potentially life-threatening right and
that itself elevates glucocorticoids
which then Elevate glucose so it's hard
to get into a g into a therapeutic
ketosis if you're if you're if you're
all stressed out all the time right so
that's why in The Press pulse we we we
put in
um uh Stress Management as one of the
key components in the Press therapy
that's right and and that could be
anything I mean it could be exercise it
could be yoga it could be massage
therapy you know I don't know
you know if whether if needles that you
put in your body you know those kinds of
acupuncture right for sure that kind of
stuff you know you can do whatever you
think is going to do to to reduce
anxiety so you're saying we do say
anxiety but what we're really talking
about is reducing glucose as a fuel
because you're taken down yes whether
it's steroids or stress or anxiety yeah
yes absolutely so by reducing anxiety
you reduce glucose right so so so if you
can get yourself into a into a a new
state
um a new state of of metabolic
homeostasis then these metabolic
therapies will really be powerful right
uh in in in maintaining
uh the health of your body and also
continuing to put metabolic pressure on
the tumor cells and also cleans up the
micro environment so the so the
inflammation in the micro environment
goes way down just like we showed right
and you can do all the molecular
signaling Cascades that you like but the
purpose is to reduce systemic and local
inflammation right this is gonna this is
gonna inhale the micro environment it's
a healing kind of a thing so the ketones
are participatory in the healing process
of the normal cells so all together you
put it you put the whole process
together and it's a really nice easy I
wouldn't say it's easy I I take that
back it it requires a lot of
participation on the part of the patient
if the patient doesn't buy onto this
it's going to be very very hard if the
family doesn't buy onto this it's going
to be hard because we've seen this
happen so it has to be a whole group
participation in the healing process and
I think the other thing that you brought
out in your former talks and so on is
that it has to be a gradual process not
just about you know the eroding away the
tumor but gradual I think for patient
understanding and implementation so they
don't get overwhelmed with oh we got
another variable here and here's what
we'd like to do because in the end it's
actually really pretty simple but to
make the transition they feel like
they're in free fall and this is a crazy
guy hi this is Dr gold camp and I
thought I would take a moment to address
a number of questions
before the next podcast
gets prepared and that is people have
asked a lot about a coaching program
that we have started in our building on
so this is a call for the next go round
of the coaching program and I thought I
would go over some of the things that
are going to be included in this
particular coaching intensive as some
people have come to call it we'll be
talking about or some of the basic
things that everybody needs to know
calculating your Macros logging in your
foods
you know knowing what foods to use also
how to use your gutometer how to measure
ketones whether it's breath or urine
your cotometer and your glucometer of
course and what's the difference and why
would you use any of these so those are
basic things that need to go over
we'll go over Labs General recommended
Labs so you can follow yourself and know
you know what things will change when
you're in ketosis what things will
probably dramatically improve
we'll talk about insulin's role insulin
resistance so you really have that
understanding down diagrammatically and
certainly in your own mind
it really applies to everybody we'll
talk about stress and its effect on your
own blood sugar and therefore what are
some of the consequences it's a actually
big deal most people
are unaware of that actually
we'll talk about various kinds of diets
keto versus zero carb or what has now
come to be known as carnivore
we'll do a fasting trial collectively as
a group
from one to seven days I'll probably try
a seven day so most people if they
haven't fasted before they'll probably
do a day or two maybe three
but to understand you know how to do it
to be supported while you're doing it
also talk about Dairy and speaking of
fast we'll do a dairy fast at a
different portion different part of the
two-month program so you get to be dairy
free for a couple of weeks not that you
have to be but to experience what it's
like to be dairy free and then you know
then you have the experience
it's not a Wither without it's knowing
what the difference is
so in addition to this or the way the
group goes is we have a special Facebook
group and there will be a maximum of 10
people in so it's not a very large group
we have weekly meetings on Zoom so it's
like a Skype format where we check in
with each other primarily me to you all
and I cover one of the points in
addition to
um Everybody checking in we will all log
our Foods into a thing called
chronometer and we'll use that as a
background of of seeing how we're doing
and so in this Facebook group that will
be combined with the previous group
every so often we'll have special topics
maybe Advanced labs to go over or
Advanced use of supplements and the
biochemistry or physiology of exercise
relative to blood sugar
in ketosis
and we can go on from there I'd like to
get into cancer a little bit so people
have an understanding we hear is a
cure-all I think you need to know more
about it before you can come up with a
statement like that
and an in-depth look at fasting and what
changes so these are some of the ideas
we're doing separate Facebook group
weekly meetings accountability
ideally be nice if we have a buddy
system but we'll see how that goes
that's pretty much a group determined
decision
so if you are interested and a lot of
people have sent me emails and PMs if
they're in the Facebook group
please send me your your email saying
yes I'm interested in the group and what
I will do is send you an application and
also send you a list of what I consider
are important requirements to
participate what I've learned from the
first group was that I'm really just
looking for people who are willing to
take action and to get involved doesn't
mean they have to be dedicated this
isn't you know superimposing some sort
of right and wrong this is basically
going through this together as opposed
to somebody who just wants to listen to
the information
and never use it I I'm trying to not
have those people but to have the people
that are willing to make a change
because it is a transition I certainly
believe everybody needs some support to
know what is expected and not expected
of the transition into ketosis and what
are some of the long-term benefits that
I've seen
and what you can expect
so if you're interested feel free to
email me at drgoldcamp so that's
d-r-g-o-l-d-k-a-m-p at keto
naturopath.com and if you're in the
Facebook group you certainly know how to
PM me okay take care everyone hope you
enjoyed the podcast
thanks for listening for anybody who has
any questions feel free to contact me on
our Facebook group keto naturopath same
name as our podcast I'm open to any
questions and we plot through the good
and the bad the difficult and the easy
week after week